According to Big Bang Theory, our universe is about 15 billion years old and our planet Earth which began around 4500 million years ago. Scientists believe that life on the earth began about 3500 million years ago. Stars are huge bodies of glowing gases and give out huge flames and radiate a tremendous amount of heat and light. Our sun is just one of the hundred thousand million (1011) stars in the Milky Way Galaxy.

It is believed that our planet Earth is part of our solar system which began around 4500 million years ago. Scientists believe that life on the earth began about 3500 million years ago.

The Stars

Stars are huge bodies of glowing gases. They give out huge flames and radiate a tremendous amount of heat and light. So they have heat and light of their own. The distances of stars are expressed in terms of light years. One light year is the distance travelled by light in one year at a speed of light which is about 300,000 km/s. Light year is a unit of distance and is equal to 9,460,000,000,000 km or 9.46×1012 km.

The color of a star is determined by its surface temperature. Stars which have low temperature appear red. Those with higher temperature appear white and those with very high temperature are blue. All stars including the sun move around some celestial body or a group of bodies with high speeds. However, when viewed from the earth the distance between any two stars does not seem to change in spite of their great speeds. This is because the stars are so far away from us that any changes in distance between them do not become perceptible in a few years.

The stars appear to move from east to west. This is because the earth rotates from west to east about an imaginary axis that passes through its centre. The earth completes one revolution in 24 hours, so the stars. A star, therefore, travel an angle of about one degree in four minutes. Since the star rises four minutes earlier every day, they are one degree higher in the sky than the previous day. In a month, they rise 30 degrees higher. In 6 months they move 180 degrees and will be close to the western horizon. Thus the constellations also move westwards.

However, there is one star, which appears stationary to us known as Pole Star or Dhruv Tara. The North Star or Polaris indicates the north because it is seen directly above the North Pole. It lies close to the axis of rotation of the earth. So it does not appear to move like all other stars. In fact, all the stars appear to revolve around the Pole Star. The pole star is not visible from the southern hemisphere. Some of the northern constellations like Ursa Major may also not be visible from some points in the southern hemisphere.

The ages of the stars range from millions to billions of years. Most stars produce their energy by fusion reactions. When a star has used all hydrogen at its centre, it starts fusing helium into carbon. If the mass of the star is only a few times the solar mass, the fusion process does not go beyond this. As the energy production inside the star stops, its core contracts under its own weight. Its density becomes very high, and it becomes a white dwarf star.

The size of a white dwarf star is comparable to that of a planet. The mass of such stars is always less than about 1.44 times the mass of the sun. This result was proved by S. Chandrasekhar. The maximum mass is, therefore, called the Chandrasekhar Limiting Mass. A white dwarf is a dead star because it does not produce its own energy by fusion process. It shines by radiating the heat stored by it during its lifetime.

Bigger white dwarf stars explode as Supernova, and depending on their size, ends up as Neutron stars or Black holes (in which the gravitational pull is so high that not even light can escape out of them).

Constellations

A group of stars forming various shapes is called constellation (star patterns). Laghu saptarshi or Ursa Minor is one such constellation. Vrihat Saptarshi also known as Ursa Major, a group of seven stars is another constellation. It forms a part of the constellation of the Big Bear. It can be seen during summer time in the early part of the night.

Orion or Mriga is another well-known constellation that can be seen during winter in the late evenings. The star Sirius, which is the brightest star in the sky, is located close to Orion. Cassiopeia is another prominent constellation in the northern sky. It is visible during winter in the early part of the night.

A constellation does not have only 5-10 stars. It has a large number of stars. However we can see only the bright stars in a constellation with our naked eye. All the stars which make up a constellation are not at the same distance. They are just in the same line of sight in the sky.

Galaxies

A galaxy is a system of stars that also contains a large number of gas clouds, some of which are quite huge. It is in these gas clouds that new stars are born. They are bound to one another by gravitational forces. A galaxy has billions of stars very close to one another. There are billions of such galaxies in the Universe. Some galaxies are spiral in shape and others are elliptical. However, there are galaxies which have no regular shape.

Our galaxy appears like a river of light running from one corner of the sky to the other. That is why it is called the Milky Way Galaxy. It is spiral in shape. In India it is known as Akash Ganga. The Milky Way Galaxy is rotating slowly about its centre. The sun too, along with the solar system, rotates about the centre of the galaxy. It takes about 250 million years to complete one revolution. Our sun is just one of the hundred thousand million (1011) stars in the Milky Way Galaxy. The sun is located about 30,000 light years away from the centre of the galaxy.

In the earlier part of the twentieth century, Edwin Hubble (1889-1953), an American astronomer, showed that all other galaxies are rushing away from our galaxy. The velocity, with which they are rushing away from us, increases as their distances increase from us. The motion of other galaxies away from us gives rise to the idea of the expanding universe. If all the galaxies are moving away from one another at this moment, there must have been a time in the past when all the galaxies were together at one place.

At that time, the whole universe occupied a small volume. The event which occurred at that time and ultimately led to the present movement of galaxies away from one another is called the Big Bang. It is believed that a huge explosion took place at that time, and since then, the universe is expanding. It has been estimated that this event occurred about 15 billion (15×109) years ago. This means, the universe is about 15 billion years old. There are a few scientists who believe that the universe appears the same at all times and at all points. According to them the universe is not changing, it did not have a beginning and will not have an end. This theory is called the Steady State.

The Solar System
The solar system is dominated by the Sun, which accounts for almost 99.9% of the matter of the whole system. It is the source of light and heat to us. Scientists believe that the Sun has been formed from a moving cloud of gases, which is called Nebula. The Sun and the planets were born out of this cloud. The force of gravity has created them. For over millions of years, these balls of dust and gas are moving around the Sun. The Sun by virtue of its mass and weight, controls the movement of the planets. This force is called the force of gravity.

Sun is at the Centre of the solar system with eight planets (i.e. Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune), satellites, asteroids, meteors and comets that move around the Sun.

Till 2006, there were nine planets in the solar system. Pluto was the farthest planet from the Sun. In 2006, the International Astronomical Union (IAU) adopted a new definition of a planet. Pluto and other celestial bodies like Ceres, 2003 UB313 does not fit this definition. It is no longer considered as a planet of the solar system.

The Sun

It is believed that the Sun was born about 5 billion years ago. Since that time, it is continuously emitting huge amount of heat and light, and it is expected to glow in a similar manner for the next 5 billion years or so. The Sun is essentially a sphere of hot gases. The disc is also called the photosphere. The layers of gas above the photosphere are extremely hot, but their densities are extremely low. These layers are very faint and are not visible in the presence of strong light from the disc of the Sun. At the time of the total solar eclipse, when the light of the Sun’s disc is completely cut off, the outermost layer becomes visible. It appears like a crown round the Sun. This layer is called Corona.

The radius of the Sun is almost 100 times the radius of the earth and its mass is about a million times the mass of the earth. The Sun is the nearest star from us. The light of the Sun takes about 8.3 light minutes to reach us. The light of the nearest star (Proxima or Alpha Centuari) to the Sun reach earth in about 4.3 light years.

The Planets

Planets are actually spinning around the Sun. They have their own elliptical path of movement known as the orbits. Movement around its own axis is called rotation and around the Sun is revolution. Planets, unlike stars, have no light or heat of their own. The word ‘planet’ comes from the Greek word “Planetai” which means ‘wanderers’. Planets keep changing their positions with respect to the stars.

• Mercury: It is nearest to the Sun. It is the smallest planet of the solar system, nearly of the same size and mass as the moon. It takes 88 days for one orbit around the Sun and 59 days for one spin on its axis. It has no satellite. There is no atmosphere on mercury. The surface of mercury is rocky and mountainous. One side of the surface facing the Sun receives maximum heat and light. The surface of this planet does not receive Sunlight or heat on its other side. One part of mercury, therefore, is very hot while the other part is very cold.

• Venus: It has no moon or satellite of its own. It rotates on its axis is somewhat unusual i.e. from east to west. The mass of Venus is nearly 4/5 times that of the earth. It takes 255 days for one orbit around the Sun and 243 days for one spin on its axis. Therefore it is often called a morning or an evening star. It has an atmosphere that consists of mainly carbon dioxide. It is the hottest planet in our solar system.

• The Earth: Our earth rotates from west to east. Our earth is more or less like a sphere, which is slightly flattened in the north and south. Slightly flattened or tapered at the poles, the earth is best to be described as geoids which mean earth like shape. It is the third nearest planet to the Sun. It is called blue planet due to presence of water and landmasses the earth appears blue-green in colour from the space. The earth is the only planet where some special environment conditions are responsible for the existence and continuation of life because it has the right temperature range, the presence of water, soil, minerals, suitable atmosphere and a blanket of ozone.

• Mars: It is almost half the size of the earth. It takes 687 days for one orbit around the Sun and 1 day for one spin on its axis. It appears slightly reddish and, therefore, it is also called the red planet. Mars has two small natural satellites named Phobos and Deimos.

• Jupiter: It is the largest planet of the solar system. It takes 11 years and 11 months for one orbit around the Sun and 9 hours, 56 minutes for one spin on its axis. It has 16 satellites. It also has faint rings around it. Its most distinguishing feature is the great red spot. Because of its large mass, it exerts a strong gravitational pull on other objects which pass by it. It is consists of hydrogen and helium in gaseous form. Its cloud like outer regions consists of methane in gaseous form while ammonia is present in crystalline form.

• Saturn: Beyond Jupiter is Saturn which appears yellowish in colour. What make it unique in the solar system are its three beautiful rings. It takes 29 years, 5 months for one orbit around the Sun and 10 hours, 40 minutes for one spin on its axis. It has 18 satellites. Saturn is the least dense among all the planets. Its density is less than that of water. It is similar in size, mass and composition to Jupiter. It is however cooler than the Jupiter.

• Uranus: It was the first planet to be discovered with the help of a telescope by William Herschel in 1781. Hydrogen and methane have been detected in the atmosphere of Uranus. It rotates from east to west. The most remarkable feature of Uranus is that it has highly tilted rotational axis. As a result, in its orbital motion it appears to roll on its side. It takes 84 years for one orbit around the Sun and 17 hours, 14 minutes for one spin on its axis. It has 17 satellites.

• Neptune: It takes 164 years for one orbit around the Sun and 16 hours 7 minutes for one spin on its axis. It has 8 satellites.

2000 years ago, the Greek astronomers thought that the earth was at the centre of the universe and the moon, the planets, the sun and stars were orbiting around it.

1. In the 6th century, it was Aryabhatta who stated that the rotation of the heavenly bodies as observed by us is due to the rotation of the earth around its axis. Aryabhatta discovered that the day and night are occurred due to the rotation of the earth. He also established that the lunar and solar eclipses were caused due to the shadows of the earth and the moon respectively.

2.  In the 15th century, Nicholas Copernicus, the polish scientist showed that the sun was at the centre of the solar system and planets revolve around it. So the sun became the centre of the universe.

3. In the 16th century, Johannes Kepler discovered the laws of planetary orbits, but the sun still remained at the centre of the universe. It was only in the beginning of the 20th century, that a picture of our own galaxy became clear. The sun was found to be located in a corner of the galaxy.

Artificial Satellites
There are many man-made satellites revolving around the earth. These are called artificial satellites. They are launched from the earth. They are much closer to the earth than the moon. The scientists have developed the technology for designing and fabricating artificial satellites in the last 50 years or so. They have also developed very powerful launch vehicles or rockets capable of carrying the satellites into the space and launch them.

At present only six countries in the world have the technology for developing artificial satellites and launching them into earth’s Orbit. India has built and launched several artificial satellites. Aryabhata was the first Indian experimental satellite launched in April 1975.

Indian Space Programme

Some other Indian satellites are INSAT, IRS, Kalpana-I, EDUSAT, Chandrayan, Mangalyaan etc. Artificial satellites have many practical applications such as taking photographs of the earth, receiving and transmitting television, radio signals, research and defence. They can be used to forecast weather, can alert us to the arrival of monsoon, and can warn us of possible disasters like floods, cyclones, forest fires. They are also used for internet, telecommunication and remote sensing. Remote sensing (collecting information from a distance) is used to collect information about weather, agriculture, land and ocean features. Artificial satellites can be used for purely scientific work. For example they can carry instruments to make astronomical observations.

List of Satellites Launched by ISRO

Hubble space telescope sends beautiful photographs of planets, stars and satellites. U.S.A. has launched a satellite recently to study x-ray radiations in space named Chandra. Artificial satellites can also be used to run advisory services for farmers and fishermen by providing information about land use, health of crops, density of fish in the seas, etc. Because of their ability to observe things from above the earth, artificial satellites are rightly called the ‘eyes in the sky’.

The speed of artificial satellites to be used for long distance communication is so adjusted that they compete one revolution around the earth in 24 hours. As a result, the satellite appears to be stationary with respect to the transmitting station on the ground. These satellites are called geostationary or geosynchronous satellites. A series of three such satellites placed at suitable points in space can cover the whole globe. Then, signals from any point can be transmitted to any other point on the earth. The minimum velocity required to launch an artificial satellite in an orbit around the earth is about 8 km/s. It is also necessary to lift the satellite to a height of about 200 km from the ground to give it a horizontal push. This is done to eliminate loss of energy due to friction suffered by the satellite, when it travelled through the earth’s atmosphere. Since artificial satellites need to be launched with very high velocities, only powerful launch vehicles i.e. specially designed rockets can do this job.

Rockets move forward by discharging gases at great speed through their exhausts. The essential properties of the fuel to be used, therefore, are:

(i) it must burn very rapidly but not explode, and

(ii) it must produce large volume of gas at high pressure and temperature. The fuel generally used is a mixture of liquid hydrogen (or kerosene sometimes) and liquid oxygen.


It is risky to store liquid fuel in the rocket before its actual launch. Solid fuels are better for storing because they do not pose any such danger. One common mixture which serves as solid fuel consists of powdered aluminium and ammonium per chlorate or ammonium nitrate.

Sometimes, satellites have to carry many instruments to carry out various tasks. The weight of instruments called payload makes the satellite very heavy. Such satellites have to be lifted with more than one rocket, firing one after another. Launch vehicles with more than one rocket are called multistage launch vehicles. Artificial satellites have generally two types of orbits. The geostationary satellites have orbits parallel to the equator. Such orbits are called equatorial orbits. Satellites used for weather forecast and remote sensing, have orbits passing over the poles of the earth. Such orbits are called polar orbits. These orbits are at a height of about a 1000 km from the earth’s surface.

The time period of a satellite in a polar orbit is usually less than two hours, so it makes several rounds in a day. Because of its nearness to the earth, a polar satellite can observe large areas of the earth around the point over which it passes. So, as the earth rotates under it, the satellite is able to scan the whole earth in a few days. By adjusting the height of the satellite, its time period is so arranged that the satellite arrives over a given point on the earth at the same time every time. This is very important from the point of view of remote sensing because the satellite is able to observe a given area repeatedly. Information about any changes that might take place in a given area can be found out by studying images sent by it on different days.

Do you know that our moon is made up of 20 smaller moonlets?

The useful life of a satellite depends crucially on the stability of its orbit. Therefore, it is constantly tracked. If any change in its orbit is noticed, it is immediately corrected by firing small rockets attached to the satellites. The orbit of an artificial satellite is generally elliptic, like that of a natural satellite. This is because the binding force in both the cases is gravitation. The picture and sound to be transmitted is first converted into electrical signals with a video camera. These electrical signals are then converted into a special type of waves and transmitted in air from a transmitting antenna so as to reach the artificial satellites.

The artificial satellites have special instruments installed in them, which receive the signals transmitted by the earth station. The signals so received are then amplified and retransmitted by the instruments fitted on the satellite. Since the satellite is located at great height, the signals transmitted by it can reach over a wide range of area on the earth. Antennas fixed in a number of stations on the earth including those of disc antennas receive the signals transmitted from the satellite and retransmit them. The TV sets in our homes receive the signals through the earth stations or disc antennas. Finally, the TV sets convert the signals in the form of image and sound.



